---
layout: post
title:  "Algebraic Connectivity - Part 1!"
date:   2024-08-16 20:01:07 -0400
categories: spectral-graph-theory graphs eigenvalues algebraic-connectivity
---

I want to spend some time here thinking about algebraic connectivity. I'm
particularly motivated by questions I've gotten over the past 2 years about
[MAC](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19879), an algorithm for sparsifying graphs,
that uses algebraic connectivity. Specific questions I've gotten include:
- What "intuitive" meaning, if any, can we ascribe to algebraic connectivity?
- Why would algebraic connectivity be a reasonable "figure of merit" for graph design or sparsification?

I want to embrace that there can be many answers to these questions, but I need
a starting point. In the past, explanations I've given for these questions have
been centered around the relationship between algebraic connectivity and the
problem of finding minimum cuts of a graph. This is something I knew I read
about somewhere and always made sense to me in a hand-wavy
conference-hallway-chat way, but I don't think I could have sat down and worked
through the math. Somehow, to me at least, there is something more intuitive
about a combinatorial idea (minimum cuts) than an algebraic one. This will be my
jumping off point.

## From graph cuts to connectivity

The first obstacle toward understanding algebraic connectivity in terms of
minimum cuts is that there are many variants of the minimum cut problem. The
most common flavor of minimum cut I've run into in my explorations is the
*normalized cut*, which, if you start digging, you'll find is related to the
spectral properties of the *normalized* graph Laplacian (the usual combinatorial
graph Laplacian, but normalized so that the diagonal elements are all 1). I
might revisit this in the future, but for now, the specific minimum cuts that
are most interesting to me are called *ratio cuts*.
